
Algorithms for aerodynamic control of relative motion
two satellites in a near circular orbit

Authors

Boris Rostislavich Andrievsky
Doctor of Technical Sciences, Leading Researcher, Laboratory for Control 
of Complex Systems, Institute for Problems in Mechanical Engineering, RAS (IPME RAS), 
Principal Researcher, 
Department of Applied Cybernetics, Faculty of Mathematics and Mechanics, 
St. Petersburg State University (St. Petersburg State University), 
Leading Researcher of the Baltic State Technical University "VOENMEKH" D.F. Ustinova "

e-mail: boris.andrievsky@gmail.com

Nikolay Vladimirovich Kuznetsov
Doctor of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Head of the Department 
of Applied Cybernetics, St. Petersburg State University, 
Head of the Laboratory of Information and Control Systems of the Institute 
for Problems of Mechanical Engineering of the Russian Academy of Sciences (IPMash RAS)

e-mail: nkuznetsov239@mail.ru

Alexander Mikhailovich Popov
Ph.D. Associate Professor of the Department of Control Systems and Computer 
Technologies of the Baltic State Technical University "VOENMEKH" n.a. D.F. Ustinov, 
e-mail: 9993868@mail.ru

Abstract

 In the recent years, there has been a growing interest in using aerodynamics  
drag force to eliminate relative drift between satellites moving in a group. 
This article is devoted to the development and study of some algorithms for 
decentalize stabilizing the relative position of two satellites moving in 
a near-circular Earth orbit. A brief review of approaches and results on methods 
of controlling a satellite group by changing the  aerodynamic drag force is given. 
Control algorithms based on the modal (pole placement) approach, 
the passification-based and variable-structure control methods, linear and 
time-optimal partial stabilization are developed and studied. The robustness 
of control systems with respect to plant model parameters is examined. 
The possibility of the appearance of sustained oscillations as a consequence 
of the control action  (the aerodynamic drag) boundedness is demonstrated.

Key words: swarm of nanosatellites, aerodynamic drag, control, relative position, 
stabilization, modal control, passification, partial stabilization, 
optimal performance, oscillations, robustness.



Acknowledgements. This study was financially supported by the Ministry 
of Science and Higher Education of Russian Federation (project No. FZWF-2020-0015).

Cite as

Andrievsky, B.R., Kuznetsov,N.V., Popov, A.M. Algorithms for aerodynamic control 
of relative motion two satellites in a near circular orbit, Differencialnie 
Uravnenia i Protsesy Upravlenia, No.4, 2020, 28-58     ()

